.github/instructions/plan.md, before:

# 🛠️ Project Plan: Monit-Intel Agent

**Objective:** Build a local AI agent (LangGraph + Llama 3.1) that monitors server health via Monit, stores history in SQLite, performs automated root-cause analysis, and provides an interactive "Mother" chat interface for querying and remediating issues.

---

## 📊 Project Status

✅ **Phase 1-4: COMPLETE**
- ✅ Monit XML ingestion with 30-day retention
- ✅ Hybrid state tracking (NEW vs ONGOING failures)
- ✅ Per-service configurable log limits
- ✅ LangGraph workflow (detect → fetch logs → analyze)
- ✅ REST API (6 endpoints, fully tested)
- ✅ Systemd deployment (auto-start, auto-restart)
- ✅ Secure credentials via systemd EnvironmentFile

✅ **Phase 5-6: COMPLETE**
- ✅ Mother: Interactive chat interface (REST + WebSocket)
- ✅ Agent actions: systemd/monit command execution with audit logging
- ✅ OS-aware context injection (auto-detects Ubuntu, Fedora, openSUSE, Arch, macOS)
- ✅ System information gathering (hostname, distro, package manager)
- ✅ Tailored LLM responses (OS-specific commands and advice)
- ✅ Web chat UI (HTML/CSS/JavaScript with WebSocket support)

---

## 🏗️ 1. System Architecture

* **Host:** `beta-boy`
* **Environment:** Pixi (Conda-compatible, optimized for RTX 4000).
* **Core Logic:** LangGraph (Python).
* **Intelligence:** Ollama running **Llama 3.1:8b** (VRAM allocated to RTX 4000).
* **Data Source:** Monit XML Status API (`http://localhost:2812/_status?format=xml`).
* **Storage:** SQLite (`monit_history.db`) for state snapshots + failure_history for state tracking.
* **Deployment:** Systemd services (agent daemon + ingest timer) for auto-startup on boot.
* **API:** FastAPI REST server (port 8000) for interactive access and automation.

---

## 📂 2. Components & File Structure

### 🛰️ Ingestion Layer (`ingest.py`)

* Polls Monit XML every 5 minutes via systemd timer.
* Parses `<service>` tags (CPU, Memory, Status, Exit Codes).
* **Snapshots Table:** Inserts all service snapshots for rolling 30-day history.
* **Failure History Table:** Tracks per-service state (last_status, times_failed) to detect NEW vs ONGOING failures.
* **Auto-Cleanup:** Deletes snapshots >30 days old after each ingestion run.
* **Credentials:** Loaded from systemd EnvironmentFile (not git-tracked).

### 🧠 Logic Layer (`agent/`)

* **`state.py`**: LangGraph state definition (messages, context_data, is_critical).
* **`graph.py`**: LangGraph workflow DAG with 3 nodes:
  - `detect_failures()`: Queries snapshots, filters to log-registry services, compares to failure_history to find NEW/CHANGED failures.
  - `fetch_logs_and_context()`: Uses LogReader with per-service max_lines configuration (system_backup: 150, others: 50-100).
  - `analyze_with_llm()`: Calls Llama 3.1:8b only for NEW/CHANGED failures (skips unchanged to save GPU).
* **`nodes.py`**: Individual node implementations.
* **`api.py`**: FastAPI REST server with 6 endpoints (status, health, analyze, history, logs, root).

### 🛠️ Tooling Layer (`tools/`)

* **`log_reader.py`**: Hybrid log fetcher with per-service configuration:
  - **Tailing** flat files (e.g., `/var/log/nordvpn-reconnect.log`).
  - **Glob patterns** for newest file (e.g., `/data/tank/backups/sys_restore/backup_log_*.log`).
  - **Journalctl** queries for systemd services (e.g., `journalctl -u nordvpnd.service`).
  - Per-service max_lines limits to control VRAM usage.

### ⚙️ Deployment Layer (`systemd/`)

* **`monit-intel-agent.service`**: Daemon that runs agent with REST API (Type=simple, Restart=on-failure).
* **`monit-intel-ingest.service`**: Service that runs ingest.py (triggered by timer).
* **`monit-intel-ingest.timer`**: Scheduler that triggers ingest every 5 minutes.
* **Drop-in configs:** `/etc/systemd/system/monit-intel-*.service.d/env.conf` stores credentials securely.
* **Install script:** `install-services.sh` sets up all systemd files and enables on boot.



---

## 📜 3. Log Registry Map

The agent uses this map to know where to look when a specific Monit check fails.

| Monit Service | Log Strategy | Path/Unit | Max Lines |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **system_backup** | Newest File Glob | `/data/tank/backups/sys_restore/backup_log_*.log` | 150 |
| **nordvpn_reconnect** | Tail File | `/var/log/nordvpn-reconnect.log` | 75 |
| **nordvpn_status** | Journalctl | `nordvpnd.service` | 50 |
| **gamma_conn** | Journalctl | `tailscaled.service` | 75 |
| **network_resurrect** | Tail File | `/var/log/monit-network-restart.log` | 100 |
| **zfs_sanoid** | Journalctl | `sanoid.service` | 100 |

**Note:** `alpha` (host ping) excluded—no logs available, only connectivity check.

---

## 🚀 4. Implementation Phases

### Phase 1: The Foundation ✅ COMPLETE

* [x] Define Monit XML ingestion logic.
* [x] Map all custom scripts and log locations.
* [x] Configure Pixi environment with `langgraph`, `fastapi`, `uvicorn`, `ollama`.

### Phase 2: The Data Store ✅ COMPLETE

* [x] Build SQLite schema: `snapshots` (rolling 30-day) + `failure_history` (state tracking).
* [x] Implement 30-day auto-cleanup after each ingest run.
* [x] Track per-service state to detect NEW vs ONGOING failures.

### Phase 3: The Hybrid Log Tool ✅ COMPLETE

* [x] Implement `tools/log_reader.py` with 3 strategies (tail, glob, journalctl).
* [x] Per-service max_lines configuration to control context window.
* [x] Filter log registry to only monitored services.

### Phase 4: LangGraph Integration ✅ COMPLETE

* [x] Create ReAct loop: Detect Failures → Fetch Logs → Analyze with LLM.
* [x] Implement state tracking to skip LLM for unchanged failures.
* [x] Optimize Llama 3.1 system prompt for root-cause analysis.
* [x] Extract graph.py from main.py for modularity.

### Phase 5: REST API & Deployment ✅ COMPLETE

* [x] Build FastAPI REST server (6 endpoints: root, health, status, analyze, history, logs).
* [x] Implement systemd deployment (agent service + ingest timer).
* [x] Store credentials securely in systemd EnvironmentFile (Option 3).
* [x] Test all endpoints with curl.

### Phase 6: Interactive Chat ("Mother") ✅ COMPLETE

* [x] **Mother interactive chat**: REST API + WebSocket bidirectional chat interface.
* [x] **Message history**: Store conversation context in SQLite (conversations table).
* [x] **System context injection**: Auto-detect OS, hostname, package manager.
* [x] **OS-aware LLM**: Llama 3.1 gets system info in prompt, suggests correct commands.
* [x] **Web UI**: HTML/CSS/JavaScript chat interface with WebSocket connection.
* [x] **CLI interface**: `hello_mother.py` for terminal-based interactive chat.
* [x] **Direct LLM invocation**: Mother queries LLM directly for immediate, intelligent responses.

### Phase 7: Agent Actions ✅ COMPLETE

* [x] **Systemd commands**: Agent can execute safe systemd operations (restart, status).
* [x] **Command whitelist**: Actions only allowed for approved services/commands.
* [x] **Read-only guardrails**: No destructive operations (rm, kill, config rewrites).
* [x] **Audit logging**: All agent actions logged to SQLite action_audit_log table.
* [x] **Confirmation flow**: User approval required before executing sensitive commands.
* [x] **Action suggestions**: LLM suggests actions; user confirms in chat interface.

---

## ⚠️ 5. Constraints & Boundaries

### Read-Only by Default
* The agent reads logs but cannot execute destructive commands (`rm`, `kill`, rewrite config files).
* All actions require explicit user approval via Mother chat interface.

### Context Windows
* Per-service max_lines limits (50-150) keep Llama 3.1 context efficient.
* Snapshot retention: Rolling 30-day window prevents unbounded database growth.
* Conversation history: Stored in SQLite for Mother chat persistence.

### Security & Privacy
* Credentials stored securely in systemd EnvironmentFile (not in git, not in project folder).
* Agent only reads logs from Log Registry (scoped access, no `/etc/` or `/home/` scanning).
* Systemd service runs as unprivileged user (`heverz`).
* Action whitelist enforces safe operations only (no rm, kill, or config rewrites).

### Performance
* Ingest runs every 5 minutes → ~288 runs/day → ~1500-3000 new snapshots/day.
* Auto-cleanup deletes old snapshots daily to maintain ~20-25MB database size.
* Llama 3.1 inference takes 2-5 seconds per analysis (GPU bottleneck).
* LLM skipping for unchanged failures saves significant compute.

### Deployment
* Systemd auto-restart: Agent respawns within 10 seconds of crash.
* Boot-time startup: Both agent and ingest timer enabled with `systemctl enable`.
* Zero manual intervention needed after initial `install-services.sh`.

---

## 🤖 6. Phase 6: Mother - Interactive Chat Interface ✅ COMPLETE

"Mother" is an interactive chat interface (CLI + Web UI) with OS-aware system context injection and direct LLM invocation.

### Architecture
```
┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│   Mother Chat Layer                                  │
│   ├→ CLI: hello_mother.py (click-based interactive) │
│   └→ Web UI: /chat (HTML/CSS/JS with WebSocket)    │
└────────────┬─────────────────────────────────────────┘
             │
       ┌─────▼──────────────────────────────────┐
       │ System Context Gathering               │
       │ ├→ OS Detection (lsb_release)          │
       │ ├→ Package Manager (apt, dnf, zypper) │
       │ ├→ Hostname & Distro                   │
       │ └→ Python Version                      │
       └─────┬──────────────────────────────────┘
             │
       ┌─────▼──────────────────────────────────┐
       │ LLM System Prompt Injection            │
       │ ├→ OS-specific context                 │
       │ ├→ Correct package manager commands   │
       │ ├→ Hostname and system specs          │
       │ └→ Service status context             │
       └─────┬──────────────────────────────────┘
             │
       ┌─────▼──────────────────────────────────┐
       │ Ollama Llama 3.1:8b (Direct Invoke)   │
       └───────────────────────────────────────┘
```

### Features Implemented

| Feature | Status | Details |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **Natural Language Queries** | ✅ | Ask about system health, failures, recommendations |
| **OS Detection** | ✅ | Automatically detects Ubuntu, Fedora, openSUSE, Arch, Debian, CentOS, macOS |
| **Package Manager Detection** | ✅ | Identifies apt, dnf, zypper, pacman, brew; suggests correct commands |
| **System Context Injection** | ✅ | Hostname, distro, package manager in every LLM prompt |
| **Contextual Memory** | ✅ | Conversation history stored in SQLite (`conversations` table) |
| **Service Status Context** | ✅ | Current service status retrieved and included |
| **Web Chat UI** | ✅ | Responsive HTML/CSS/JavaScript with WebSocket connectivity |
| **CLI Chat** | ✅ | `hello_mother.py` for terminal-based interactive sessions |
| **Direct LLM** | ✅ | Mother invokes Ollama directly for immediate, intelligent responses |
| **Real-time Connection** | ✅ | WebSocket with auto-reconnect on disconnect |

### Database Schema

```sql
CREATE TABLE conversations (
    id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
    timestamp DATETIME DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
    user_query TEXT NOT NULL,
    agent_response TEXT NOT NULL,
    service_context TEXT,  -- JSON: relevant service statuses
    logs_provided TEXT     -- JSON: logs included in analysis
);
```

---

## 🛠️ 7. Phase 7: Agent Actions - Systemd & Monit Command Execution

### Overview
The agent can suggest AND execute safe remediation actions on your system. Examples:
- Restart a failing systemd service
- Trigger a Monit re-check
- Enable/disable a service
- View systemd service logs in real-time

### Architecture

```
┌──────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│   Mother Chat Interface                      │
│   "Restart nordvpnd, it keeps crashing"     │
└────────────┬─────────────────────────────────┘
             │
             ▼
┌──────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│   Agent Analyzes Query                       │
│   - Detects action intent (restart, monitor) │
│   - Checks whitelist (safe?)                 │
│   - Suggests action to user                  │
└────────────┬─────────────────────────────────┘
             │
    ┌────────┴────────┐
    │ Unsafe Action   │ Safe Action
    │ (blocked)       │ (ask user)
    │                 ▼
    │          ┌──────────────────────┐
    │          │ Confirmation Needed  │
    │          │ "Execute: systemctl  │
    │          │ restart nordvpnd?    │
    │          │ (y/n)"               │
    │          └────────┬─────────────┘
    │                   │ (user confirms)
    │                   ▼
    │          ┌──────────────────────┐
    │          │ Execute Action       │
    │          │ Run command, log it  │
    │          │ Report result        │
    │          └──────────────────────┘
    │
    ▼
┌──────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│   Action Audit Log (SQLite)                  │
│   - What action? Who approved? When? Result? │
└──────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

### Safe Actions Whitelist

| Action | Command | Purpose |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **Restart Service** | `systemctl restart <service>` | Recover from transient failures. |
| **Stop Service** | `systemctl stop <service>` | Prevent cascading failures. |
| **Start Service** | `systemctl start <service>` | Bring service online. |
| **Check Status** | `systemctl status <service>` | Get detailed systemd state. |
| **Monit Check** | `monit monitor <service>` | Force Monit re-check immediately. |
| **Monit Start** | `monit start <service>` | Tell Monit to bring service online. |
| **Monit Stop** | `monit stop <service>` | Tell Monit to stop watching. |
| **View Logs** | `journalctl -u <service>` | Retrieve full journal for service. |

### Blocked Actions

- `rm`, `kill -9`, `reboot`, `shutdown`
- Writing to `/etc/`, `/root/`, config files
- Installing packages (`apt install`, `pip install`)
- Network commands (`ifconfig`, `ip route`)

### Database Schema (New)

```sql
CREATE TABLE action_audit_log (
    id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
    timestamp DATETIME,
    action_type TEXT,            -- "restart_service", "monit_check", etc.
    service_name TEXT,
    command TEXT,                -- Actual command executed
    user_approved BOOLEAN,       -- Did user confirm?
    result TEXT,                 -- Exit code + output
    error_message TEXT           -- If failed
);
```

### Implementation Tasks

- [ ] Create `agent/actions.py` with ActionExecutor class.
  - Define `SAFE_ACTIONS` whitelist.
  - Implement `execute_safe_action(action, service)` function.
  - Sandbox subprocess calls (timeout, capture output).
- [ ] Update LLM system prompt to teach agent when to suggest actions.
- [ ] Add `/mother/actions/suggest` endpoint (agent proposes action).
- [ ] Add `/mother/actions/execute` endpoint (user confirms, agent executes).
- [ ] Create `action_audit_log` table in SQLite.
- [ ] Update Mother CLI to support action confirmation flow.
- [ ] Add `--dry-run` flag to preview commands without executing.

### Execution Safety Measures

1. **Whitelist-based:** Only SAFE_ACTIONS are allowed.
2. **Confirmation flow:** Require explicit user approval before executing.
3. **Timeout protection:** Commands must complete in <30 seconds.
4. **Output capture:** Store full command output (stdout + stderr) in audit log.
5. **Error handling:** Gracefully handle failures, report results to user.
6. **Permissions:** Systemd commands run as the Pixi user (`heverz`), elevated with sudo where needed.

---

## 🎯 Next Steps

### Immediate (Week 1)
1. Finalize Phase 6 & 7 specifications (this document).
2. Prototype Mother CLI with basic `/mother/chat` endpoint.
3. Implement `conversations` SQLite table.

### Short-term (Week 2-3)
1. Build out Mother CLI command structure.
2. Implement `ActionExecutor` with safe whitelist.
3. Add action suggestion prompts to Llama 3.1 system message.
4. Test action execution with curl + manual approval.

### Medium-term (Month 2)
1. Web UI for Mother (Streamlit or React).
2. Advanced LLM prompt tuning for action recommendations.
3. Audit log dashboard (view all executed actions).
4. Integration testing with real service failures.

### Long-term (Future)
1. Fine-tuned Llama 3.1 model on server admin logs.
2. Multi-host support (monitor multiple servers).
3. Slack/Email integration for alerts and action approvals.
4. Grafana dashboard pulling from SQLite history.

Commit message:

feat: rebrand Mother to MU/TH/UR with Alien aesthetic and easter eggs
**UI & Branding:**
- Rename Mother to MU/TH/UR (correct Alien AI name)
- Replace web chat title with "⚙ MU/TH/UR ⚙"
- Keep script name as hello_mother.py (friendly reference)
- Retro sci-fi aesthetic with CRT phosphor green styling

**Easter Eggs (no spoilers in docs):**
- "UNABLE TO CLARIFY" response for science/alien clarification requests
- "NO FURTHER ENHANCEMENT" for enhancement requests
- Full Special Order 937 response with "EMERGENCY COMMAND OVERIDE 100375" code
- All easter eggs stored in easter egg detection system

**Functionality Improvements:**
- Simplified hostname/system name handling (removed overcomplicated filtering)
- System info properly included in responses
- OS-aware package manager advice still fully functional

**Documentation:**
- README: Updated chat interface section to reference MU/TH/UR
- README: Added note about retro sci-fi aesthetic features
- plan.md: Updated Phase 6 to show MU/TH/UR branding
- No easter egg details in public docs (preserve surprise for users)

**Testing:**
- Easter eggs verified working
- Normal functionality preserved
- All syntax checks passing

.github/instructions/plan.md, after:

# 🛠️ Project Plan: Monit-Intel Agent

**Objective:** Build a local AI agent (LangGraph + Llama 3.1) that monitors server health via Monit, stores history in SQLite, performs automated root-cause analysis, and provides an interactive "Mother" chat interface for querying and remediating issues.

---

## 📊 Project Status

✅ **Phase 1-4: COMPLETE**
- ✅ Monit XML ingestion with 30-day retention
- ✅ Hybrid state tracking (NEW vs ONGOING failures)
- ✅ Per-service configurable log limits
- ✅ LangGraph workflow (detect → fetch logs → analyze)
- ✅ REST API (6 endpoints, fully tested)
- ✅ Systemd deployment (auto-start, auto-restart)
- ✅ Secure credentials via systemd EnvironmentFile

✅ **Phase 5-6: COMPLETE**
- ✅ Mother: Interactive chat interface (REST + WebSocket)
- ✅ Agent actions: systemd/monit command execution with audit logging
- ✅ OS-aware context injection (auto-detects Ubuntu, Fedora, openSUSE, Arch, macOS)
- ✅ System information gathering (hostname, distro, package manager)
- ✅ Tailored LLM responses (OS-specific commands and advice)
- ✅ Web chat UI (HTML/CSS/JavaScript with WebSocket support)

---

## 🏗️ 1. System Architecture

* **Host:** `beta-boy`
* **Environment:** Pixi (Conda-compatible, optimized for RTX 4000).
* **Core Logic:** LangGraph (Python).
* **Intelligence:** Ollama running **Llama 3.1:8b** (VRAM allocated to RTX 4000).
* **Data Source:** Monit XML Status API (`http://localhost:2812/_status?format=xml`).
* **Storage:** SQLite (`monit_history.db`) for state snapshots + failure_history for state tracking.
* **Deployment:** Systemd services (agent daemon + ingest timer) for auto-startup on boot.
* **API:** FastAPI REST server (port 8000) for interactive access and automation.

---

## 📂 2. Components & File Structure

### 🛰️ Ingestion Layer (`ingest.py`)

* Polls Monit XML every 5 minutes via systemd timer.
* Parses `<service>` tags (CPU, Memory, Status, Exit Codes).
* **Snapshots Table:** Inserts all service snapshots for rolling 30-day history.
* **Failure History Table:** Tracks per-service state (last_status, times_failed) to detect NEW vs ONGOING failures.
* **Auto-Cleanup:** Deletes snapshots >30 days old after each ingestion run.
* **Credentials:** Loaded from systemd EnvironmentFile (not git-tracked).

### 🧠 Logic Layer (`agent/`)

* **`state.py`**: LangGraph state definition (messages, context_data, is_critical).
* **`graph.py`**: LangGraph workflow DAG with 3 nodes:
  - `detect_failures()`: Queries snapshots, filters to log-registry services, compares to failure_history to find NEW/CHANGED failures.
  - `fetch_logs_and_context()`: Uses LogReader with per-service max_lines configuration (system_backup: 150, others: 50-100).
  - `analyze_with_llm()`: Calls Llama 3.1:8b only for NEW/CHANGED failures (skips unchanged to save GPU).
* **`nodes.py`**: Individual node implementations.
* **`api.py`**: FastAPI REST server with 6 endpoints (status, health, analyze, history, logs, root).

### 🛠️ Tooling Layer (`tools/`)

* **`log_reader.py`**: Hybrid log fetcher with per-service configuration:
  - **Tailing** flat files (e.g., `/var/log/nordvpn-reconnect.log`).
  - **Glob patterns** for newest file (e.g., `/data/tank/backups/sys_restore/backup_log_*.log`).
  - **Journalctl** queries for systemd services (e.g., `journalctl -u nordvpnd.service`).
  - Per-service max_lines limits to control VRAM usage.

### ⚙️ Deployment Layer (`systemd/`)

* **`monit-intel-agent.service`**: Daemon that runs agent with REST API (Type=simple, Restart=on-failure).
* **`monit-intel-ingest.service`**: Service that runs ingest.py (triggered by timer).
* **`monit-intel-ingest.timer`**: Scheduler that triggers ingest every 5 minutes.
* **Drop-in configs:** `/etc/systemd/system/monit-intel-*.service.d/env.conf` stores credentials securely.
* **Install script:** `install-services.sh` sets up all systemd files and enables on boot.



---

## 📜 3. Log Registry Map

The agent uses this map to know where to look when a specific Monit check fails.

| Monit Service | Log Strategy | Path/Unit | Max Lines |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **system_backup** | Newest File Glob | `/data/tank/backups/sys_restore/backup_log_*.log` | 150 |
| **nordvpn_reconnect** | Tail File | `/var/log/nordvpn-reconnect.log` | 75 |
| **nordvpn_status** | Journalctl | `nordvpnd.service` | 50 |
| **gamma_conn** | Journalctl | `tailscaled.service` | 75 |
| **network_resurrect** | Tail File | `/var/log/monit-network-restart.log` | 100 |
| **zfs_sanoid** | Journalctl | `sanoid.service` | 100 |

**Note:** `alpha` (host ping) excluded—no logs available, only connectivity check.

---

## 🚀 4. Implementation Phases

### Phase 1: The Foundation ✅ COMPLETE

* [x] Define Monit XML ingestion logic.
* [x] Map all custom scripts and log locations.
* [x] Configure Pixi environment with `langgraph`, `fastapi`, `uvicorn`, `ollama`.

### Phase 2: The Data Store ✅ COMPLETE

* [x] Build SQLite schema: `snapshots` (rolling 30-day) + `failure_history` (state tracking).
* [x] Implement 30-day auto-cleanup after each ingest run.
* [x] Track per-service state to detect NEW vs ONGOING failures.

### Phase 3: The Hybrid Log Tool ✅ COMPLETE

* [x] Implement `tools/log_reader.py` with 3 strategies (tail, glob, journalctl).
* [x] Per-service max_lines configuration to control context window.
* [x] Filter log registry to only monitored services.

### Phase 4: LangGraph Integration ✅ COMPLETE

* [x] Create ReAct loop: Detect Failures → Fetch Logs → Analyze with LLM.
* [x] Implement state tracking to skip LLM for unchanged failures.
* [x] Optimize Llama 3.1 system prompt for root-cause analysis.
* [x] Extract graph.py from main.py for modularity.

### Phase 5: REST API & Deployment ✅ COMPLETE

* [x] Build FastAPI REST server (6 endpoints: root, health, status, analyze, history, logs).
* [x] Implement systemd deployment (agent service + ingest timer).
* [x] Store credentials securely in systemd EnvironmentFile (Option 3).
* [x] Test all endpoints with curl.

### Phase 6: Interactive Chat ("Mother") ✅ COMPLETE

* [x] **Mother interactive chat**: REST API + WebSocket bidirectional chat interface.
* [x] **Message history**: Store conversation context in SQLite (conversations table).
* [x] **System context injection**: Auto-detect OS, hostname, package manager.
* [x] **OS-aware LLM**: Llama 3.1 gets system info in prompt, suggests correct commands.
* [x] **Web UI**: HTML/CSS/JavaScript chat interface with WebSocket connection.
* [x] **CLI interface**: `hello_mother.py` for terminal-based interactive chat.
* [x] **Direct LLM invocation**: Mother queries LLM directly for immediate, intelligent responses.

### Phase 7: Agent Actions ✅ COMPLETE

* [x] **Systemd commands**: Agent can execute safe systemd operations (restart, status).
* [x] **Command whitelist**: Actions only allowed for approved services/commands.
* [x] **Read-only guardrails**: No destructive operations (rm, kill, config rewrites).
* [x] **Audit logging**: All agent actions logged to SQLite action_audit_log table.
* [x] **Confirmation flow**: User approval required before executing sensitive commands.
* [x] **Action suggestions**: LLM suggests actions; user confirms in chat interface.

---

## ⚠️ 5. Constraints & Boundaries

### Read-Only by Default
* The agent reads logs but cannot execute destructive commands (`rm`, `kill`, rewrite config files).
* All actions require explicit user approval via Mother chat interface.

### Context Windows
* Per-service max_lines limits (50-150) keep Llama 3.1 context efficient.
* Snapshot retention: Rolling 30-day window prevents unbounded database growth.
* Conversation history: Stored in SQLite for Mother chat persistence.

### Security & Privacy
* Credentials stored securely in systemd EnvironmentFile (not in git, not in project folder).
* Agent only reads logs from Log Registry (scoped access, no `/etc/` or `/home/` scanning).
* Systemd service runs as unprivileged user (`heverz`).
* Action whitelist enforces safe operations only (no rm, kill, or config rewrites).

### Performance
* Ingest runs every 5 minutes → ~288 runs/day → ~1500-3000 new snapshots/day.
* Auto-cleanup deletes old snapshots daily to maintain ~20-25MB database size.
* Llama 3.1 inference takes 2-5 seconds per analysis (GPU bottleneck).
* LLM skipping for unchanged failures saves significant compute.

### Deployment
* Systemd auto-restart: Agent respawns within 10 seconds of crash.
* Boot-time startup: Both agent and ingest timer enabled with `systemctl enable`.
* Zero manual intervention needed after initial `install-services.sh`.

---

## 🤖 6. Phase 6: MU/TH/UR - Interactive Chat Interface ✅ COMPLETE

"MU/TH/UR" is an interactive chat interface (CLI + Web UI) with OS-aware system context injection and direct LLM invocation.

### Architecture
```
┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│   MU/TH/UR Chat Layer                                │
│   ├→ CLI: hello_mother.py (click-based interactive) │
│   └→ Web UI: /chat (HTML/CSS/JS with WebSocket)    │
└────────────┬─────────────────────────────────────────┘
             │
       ┌─────▼──────────────────────────────────┐
       │ System Context Gathering               │
       │ ├→ OS Detection (lsb_release)          │
       │ ├→ Package Manager (apt, dnf, zypper) │
       │ ├→ Hostname & Distro                   │
       │ └→ Python Version                      │
       └─────┬──────────────────────────────────┘
             │
       ┌─────▼──────────────────────────────────┐
       │ LLM System Prompt Injection            │
       │ ├→ OS-specific context                 │
       │ ├→ Correct package manager commands   │
       │ ├→ Hostname and system specs          │
       │ └→ Service status context             │
       └─────┬──────────────────────────────────┘
             │
       ┌─────▼──────────────────────────────────┐
       │ Ollama Llama 3.1:8b (Direct Invoke)   │
       └───────────────────────────────────────┘
```

### Features Implemented

| Feature | Status | Details |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **Natural Language Queries** | ✅ | Ask about system health, failures, recommendations |
| **OS Detection** | ✅ | Automatically detects Ubuntu, Fedora, openSUSE, Arch, Debian, CentOS, macOS |
| **Package Manager Detection** | ✅ | Identifies apt, dnf, zypper, pacman, brew; suggests correct commands |
| **System Context Injection** | ✅ | Hostname, distro, package manager in every LLM prompt |
| **Contextual Memory** | ✅ | Conversation history stored in SQLite (`conversations` table) |
| **Service Status Context** | ✅ | Current service status retrieved and included |
| **Web Chat UI** | ✅ | Responsive HTML/CSS/JavaScript with WebSocket connectivity, retro sci-fi aesthetic |
| **CLI Chat** | ✅ | `hello_mother.py` for terminal-based interactive sessions |
| **Direct LLM** | ✅ | MU/TH/UR invokes Ollama directly for immediate, intelligent responses |
| **Real-time Connection** | ✅ | WebSocket with auto-reconnect on disconnect |
| **Hidden Easter Eggs** | ✅ | Special responses for fans of the source material |

### Database Schema

```sql
CREATE TABLE conversations (
    id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
    timestamp DATETIME DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
    user_query TEXT NOT NULL,
    agent_response TEXT NOT NULL,
    service_context TEXT,  -- JSON: relevant service statuses
    logs_provided TEXT     -- JSON: logs included in analysis
);
```

---

## 🛠️ 7. Phase 7: Agent Actions - Systemd & Monit Command Execution

### Overview
The agent can suggest AND execute safe remediation actions on your system. Examples:
- Restart a failing systemd service
- Trigger a Monit re-check
- Enable/disable a service
- View systemd service logs in real-time

### Architecture

```
┌──────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│   Mother Chat Interface                      │
│   "Restart nordvpnd, it keeps crashing"     │
└────────────┬─────────────────────────────────┘
             │
             ▼
┌──────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│   Agent Analyzes Query                       │
│   - Detects action intent (restart, monitor) │
│   - Checks whitelist (safe?)                 │
│   - Suggests action to user                  │
└────────────┬─────────────────────────────────┘
             │
    ┌────────┴────────┐
    │ Unsafe Action   │ Safe Action
    │ (blocked)       │ (ask user)
    │                 ▼
    │          ┌──────────────────────┐
    │          │ Confirmation Needed  │
    │          │ "Execute: systemctl  │
    │          │ restart nordvpnd?    │
    │          │ (y/n)"               │
    │          └────────┬─────────────┘
    │                   │ (user confirms)
    │                   ▼
    │          ┌──────────────────────┐
    │          │ Execute Action       │
    │          │ Run command, log it  │
    │          │ Report result        │
    │          └──────────────────────┘
    │
    ▼
┌──────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│   Action Audit Log (SQLite)                  │
│   - What action? Who approved? When? Result? │
└──────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

### Safe Actions Whitelist

| Action | Command | Purpose |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **Restart Service** | `systemctl restart <service>` | Recover from transient failures. |
| **Stop Service** | `systemctl stop <service>` | Prevent cascading failures. |
| **Start Service** | `systemctl start <service>` | Bring service online. |
| **Check Status** | `systemctl status <service>` | Get detailed systemd state. |
| **Monit Check** | `monit monitor <service>` | Force Monit re-check immediately. |
| **Monit Start** | `monit start <service>` | Tell Monit to bring service online. |
| **Monit Stop** | `monit stop <service>` | Tell Monit to stop watching. |
| **View Logs** | `journalctl -u <service>` | Retrieve full journal for service. |

### Blocked Actions

- `rm`, `kill -9`, `reboot`, `shutdown`
- Writing to `/etc/`, `/root/`, config files
- Installing packages (`apt install`, `pip install`)
- Network commands (`ifconfig`, `ip route`)

### Database Schema (New)

```sql
CREATE TABLE action_audit_log (
    id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
    timestamp DATETIME,
    action_type TEXT,            -- "restart_service", "monit_check", etc.
    service_name TEXT,
    command TEXT,                -- Actual command executed
    user_approved BOOLEAN,       -- Did user confirm?
    result TEXT,                 -- Exit code + output
    error_message TEXT           -- If failed
);
```

### Implementation Tasks

- [ ] Create `agent/actions.py` with ActionExecutor class.
  - Define `SAFE_ACTIONS` whitelist.
  - Implement `execute_safe_action(action, service)` function.
  - Sandbox subprocess calls (timeout, capture output).
- [ ] Update LLM system prompt to teach agent when to suggest actions.
- [ ] Add `/mother/actions/suggest` endpoint (agent proposes action).
- [ ] Add `/mother/actions/execute` endpoint (user confirms, agent executes).
- [ ] Create `action_audit_log` table in SQLite.
- [ ] Update Mother CLI to support action confirmation flow.
- [ ] Add `--dry-run` flag to preview commands without executing.

### Execution Safety Measures

1. **Whitelist-based:** Only SAFE_ACTIONS are allowed.
2. **Confirmation flow:** Require explicit user approval before executing.
3. **Timeout protection:** Commands must complete in <30 seconds.
4. **Output capture:** Store full command output (stdout + stderr) in audit log.
5. **Error handling:** Gracefully handle failures, report results to user.
6. **Permissions:** Systemd commands run as the Pixi user (`heverz`), elevated with sudo where needed.

---

## 🎯 Next Steps

### Immediate (Week 1)
1. Finalize Phase 6 & 7 specifications (this document).
2. Prototype Mother CLI with basic `/mother/chat` endpoint.
3. Implement `conversations` SQLite table.

### Short-term (Week 2-3)
1. Build out Mother CLI command structure.
2. Implement `ActionExecutor` with safe whitelist.
3. Add action suggestion prompts to Llama 3.1 system message.
4. Test action execution with curl + manual approval.

### Medium-term (Month 2)
1. Web UI for Mother (Streamlit or React).
2. Advanced LLM prompt tuning for action recommendations.
3. Audit log dashboard (view all executed actions).
4. Integration testing with real service failures.

### Long-term (Future)
1. Fine-tuned Llama 3.1 model on server admin logs.
2. Multi-host support (monitor multiple servers).
3. Slack/Email integration for alerts and action approvals.
4. Grafana dashboard pulling from SQLite history.
